Memory is the brain’s ability to store and retrieve information related to previous experiences.Memory occurs in two stages: short-term and long-term.Short-term memory reflects an immediate sensory perception of an object or idea that occurs before the image is stored. Short-term memory enables you to dial a telephone number after looking it up but without looking at the number directly.If you call the number frequently, it becomes stored in long-term memory and can be recalled several weeks after you originally looked it up. Short-term memory and long-term memory can be thought of as memory structures, each varying as to how much information it can hold and for how long.

Memory relies on the ability to process information. Information processing begins with the environmental stimuli that you see, hear, smell, taste, and feel. These experiences are initially recorded in the brain’s sensory register, which holds information just long enough (one to three seconds) for you to decide whether to process it further. Information that you do not selectively attend to will disappear from the system. However, if you recognize and attend to the information as meaningful or relevant, it is sent to short-term memory. Short-term memory can hold approximately seven unrelated bits of information at a time.

Short-term memory is often called working memory because it holds information that you are working with at a given moment, but only for about 20 seconds. Then, unless the information is processed further, it is quickly forgotten. For example, if you were asked to dial an unfamiliar telephone number, received a busy signal, and were then distracted by something else for 20 seconds, you probably would have forgotten the number at that point. Unless information in short-term memory is processed further, it does not make it to long-term memory.

Several control processes enable the transfer of information from short-term to long-term memory. One such process is rehearsal, or “practice makes perfect.” Rehearsal is when you repeat something to yourself over and over. The purpose behind such behavior is usually to memorize information for later use, although sometimes it is simply to hold information in short-term memory for immediate use. For example, you may rehearse a telephone number by saying it aloud so you can redial it after getting a busy signal without having to look it up again in the phone book. Another process that enables the transfer of information to long-term memory is the association of new data with data previously learned and stored in long-term memory. Thus, it is easier to learn a new card game if you already have “card sense” from playing other games.

For cognitive psychologists, long-term memory is the most interesting of the memory structures, and most believe that the storage capacity of long-term memory is unlimited and contains a permanent record of everything you have learned. Long-term memory plays an influential role throughout the information processing system. The interests, attitudes, skills, and knowledge of the world existing in your long-term memory influence what you perceive and how you interpret your perceptions. They also affect whether you process information for short-term or long-term storage.

Long-term memory can hold recollections of personal experiences as well as factual knowledge acquired through other means such as reading. It also holds skills such as knowing how to ride a bicycle. In its ability to learn and remember, the brain can distinguish between facts and skills. When you acquire factual knowledge by memorizing dates, word definitions, formulas, and other information, you can consciously retrieve this fact memory from the data bank of your long-term memory. In contrast, skill memory usually involves motor activities that you learn by repetition without consciously remembering specific information. You perform learned motor skills, such as walking or riding a bicycle, without consciously recalling the individual steps required to do these tasks.
